# Using consumer behavior data to reduce energy consumption in smart homes Applying machine learning to save energy without lowering comfort of inhabitants

## Abstract

This paper discusses how usage patterns and preferences of inhabitants can be learned efficiently to allow smart homes to autonomously achieve energy savings. We propose a frequent sequential pattern mining algorithm suitable for real-life smart home event data. The performance of the proposed algorithm is compared to existing algorithms regarding completeness/correctness of the results, run times as well as memory consumption and elaborates on the shortcomings of the different solutions.

We also propose a recommender system based on the developed algorithm. This recommender provides recommendations to the users to reduce their energy consumption. The recommender system was deployed to a set of test homes. The test participants rated the impact of the recommendations on their comfort. We used this feedback to adjust the system parameters and make it more accurate during a second test phase. The historical dataset provided by digitalSTROM contained 33 homes with 3521 devices and over 4 million events. The system produced 160 recommendations on the first phase and 120 on the second phase. The ratio of useful recommendations was close to 10%.

### INTRODUCTION

King defines a smart home as a "dwelling incorporating a communications network that connects the key electrical appliances and services, and allows them to be remotely controlled, monitored or accessed". The definition goes on by stating benefits that a smart home can have regarding energy management like running appliances when energy is cheapest or controlling the air conditioning/heating for maximum efficiency when the house is busy or empty.

Harper acknowledged that "smart house technologies that most people are pleased with are connected with saving energy or money". Moreover, previous studies carried by digitalSTROM show that energy savings can only be achieved if the inhabitants comfort is taken into consideration.

Based on these findings, we believe that a smart home needs to be able to predict future needs of its inhabitants before initiating actions to reduce the energy consumption without decreasing the comfort of its inhabitants. While Wang suggest that manually specified preferences are used, this project wants to analyze if and how such preferences in the form of frequent and periodic patterns can also be gained autonomously through sequential pattern mining. Frequent means a pattern which occurs more often than others, while periodic means a pattern which occurs at a constant interval. Manual specification of such rules is not desirable because of the high degree of interaction and involvement required from the inhabitants.

In this paper we propose an autonomous recommender system to provide energy saving actions to the home inhabitants without reducing their comfort level. In order to achieve this goal, the recommender has to be fed with the event stream from the smart home and to previously mined patterns that reflects the inhabitants' behavior. We propose thus a frequent sequential pattern mining algorithm tailored for mining smart home event data. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II provides some background about smart homes and pattern mining applied to them. Section III describes the proposed algorithm for mining patterns in smart homes events. Section IV presents the proposed recommender to reduce energy consumption in the smart homes. The results of field tests are presented in Section V and in Section VI conclusions are drawn and future work directions are described.

### II. BACKGROUND

### A. Pattern mining for smart homes

A suitable algorithm allows a smart home to learn its inhabitants' usage patterns autonomously. The Apriori algorithm was originally designed with the goal of association rule mining in mind, as described by Agrawal & Srikant. In the smart home context, the sequence of events is of crucial importance when analyzing the data generated by the inhabitants. In order to learn from the inhabitants habits, it is relevant if appliance A was turned on before or after appliance B. However, the Apriori algorithm does not take into account the sequence of events when detecting patterns.

Rashidi and Cook adapted the Apriori algorithm to consider the order of events when mining patterns from smart home data. They look for patterns that are at least two activities long and then iteratively extend the length of the patterns by one until they are unable to find frequent patterns anymore.

A wide range of sequential pattern mining algorithms are implemented in the open-source data mining library SPMF by Fournier-Viger et al.. The implemented generic algorithms include BIDE+ and PrefixSpan. They are in general considered very fast and efficient sequential pattern mining because of their usage of pruning techniques.

Another desired feature that a pattern mining algorithm used for smart homes should support is wildcarding. The idea behind wildcarding patterns is that there are interesting patterns that are very similar, differing only by a few events (e.g. one or two), but are not considered frequent because of this variation. For the sake of clarity, consider a set of patterns that differ by only one event. If a wildcard would replace this event, the frequency of occurrence of such pattern would increase and the wildcarded pattern would become frequent. GapBIDE by Li is an adaption and enhancement of the previously mentioned BIDE+ algorithm, taking wildcarding into account. We use GapBIDE as a representative of sequential pattern mining algorithms. Other algorithms in this class are, for example, MAIL by Xie and PMBC by Wu.

### B. Smart home technology

digitalSTROM products provide connectivity to electrical devices in the home over the existing power cables. This includes every lamp, light switch, blinds and any plugged in device. This network of devices is connected through a server mounted in the electrical cabinet to a local area network. The result is a network of connected devices, bringing the internet of things (IoT) to each home. digitalSTROM components are based on a high volt IC in a small size module. Each digitalSTROM module can switch, dim, measure electricity and communicate its status. The products are available through Europe with its larger installed base in Germany and Switzerland.

### C. Criteria used for choosing pattern mining algorithms

The choice of the pattern mining algorithms used in this work was influenced by the following criteria:

• The algorithm has to be able to find patterns in data.

To be more precise it has to find both frequent sequential patterns and periodic sequential patterns

• It has to be able to find wildcarded patterns and to output where the wildcard is positioned in the pattern

• The algorithm needs to be able to process the continuous stream of data coming from a smart home, i.e. it must be able to process this events in real-time

In general both Apriori-inspired algorithms employing pruning techniques, from the family of deterministic algorithms, as well as genetic algorithms, from the family of heuristic algorithms, are suitable for finding frequent patterns in large datasets. In this work, we consider only deterministic algorithm, since they are able to find patterns in a reasonable amount of time and do not have the disadvantage of getting stuck at local maxima.

### D. Training data set

The historical training dataset used contains 33 homes with 3521 devices, which are related to 4,331,443 events and 6829 unique scenes. These events extend over a period between 08/12/2002 and 25/06/2014. There are several types of electrical devices that can be connected and they are grouped by functionality, such as lighting, shades, audio and so on. The events themselves are either in one of the device groups or are of a broadcast or unknown type.

Events have a scene ID and a source ID. The scene ID defines the action executed, like "Turn light in kitchen off", while the source ID can be used to identify if it was a user generated event, a scripting event, e.g. the one generated by a system timer, or a sensor event, e.g. the one generated by a motion detector or temperature sensor.

For example, the following 3 events compose one pattern:

### A. Window Sliding with De-Duplication (WSDD)

A new algorithm for mining patterns from smart home events was designed. The algorithm is based on the idea of socalled open and overlapping patterns. It follows a brute force approach, namely find all possible frequent patterns by sliding a window of a specifiable size over the chronologically ordered events and count their overall occurrences inside the data. The patterns found by this algorithm were encouraging: a two-event pattern with over 9% support was found and supported the assumption that patterns are deducible in event data of smart homes. However, the run times were long, as expected from a brute-force approach.

In order to improve the algorithm, a hash map data structure was used. This hash map uses the key for storing the pattern itself and the support count of this pattern is stored as the value. This means that, when the proposed algorithm has finished mining, the support of a certain pattern is stored as the value, while the pattern itself is the key. Therefore, we achieve a speed improvement by doing the following:

1. Pattern de-duplication: The enhanced algorithm avoids mining patterns more than once. This gives the algorithm its name: WSDD, Window Sliding with De-Duplication 2. Instead of building possible patterns in a first loop and then mine for these found patterns in a 2nd loop, the counting is done in the same loop. This eliminates the need for reiterating over the events As an additional improvement, in analogy to the Apriori algorithm, a minimum support parameter was introduced. This was done because very infrequent patterns are not interesting, e.g. all the patterns that occur only once can never be considered normal behavior of the smart home inhabitants. The minimum support parameter is therefore used to post-process the patterns found. This algorithm returns only patterns that have a support greater than this minimum.

The final proposed algorithm is depicted in Fig. 1.

### B. Algorithm comparison

To compare the WSDD algorithm with the two well-known sequential pattern mining algorithms BIDE+ and PrefixSpan, an interface to the open-source Java framework SPMF by Fournier-Viger et al. was implemented. It became obvious very soon that regarding throughput and run times, the developed WSDD algorithm is very competitive for the available data set. For a minimum support of 0.01, PrefixSpan needs 3 seconds for a smart home with 80000 events, BIDE+ needs 25 seconds while WSDD finishes in less than 1 second.

A reason for the good run times of the WSDD algorithm is that the number of the different patterns in a smart home is relatively small which allows the algorithm to store all the patterns without producing very big hash maps.

Moreover, there are three general advantages of the smart home specific algorithm WSDD over general purpose algorithms such as BIDE+, PrefixSpan and GapBIDE:

• WSDD reports not only frequent but also periodic patterns

• WSDD reports where wildcards are detected in a pattern

• No post-processing is needed for the correct support count

These results were expected given the fact that PrefixSpan, BIDE+ and GapBIDE are generic algorithms, not explicitly developed for frequent sequential pattern mining in smart homes.

We ran benchmarks measuring both the run times as well as the memory consumption. The different algorithms were run multiple times and with various different parameter settings. To get representative results, a selection of five different smart homes with various amounts of events was chosen: the smart home with the fewest events (1,173 events), three smart homes with average amounts of events (22,489 -42,129 events) and the smart home with most events (156,121 events). The results of an example run can be seen in Fig. 2. In addition to the run time benchmarks, the same four algorithms were compared regarding their memory consumption. The memory consumption was measured with the "MemoryLogger", which is provided as part of the SPMF framework and with Performance Monitor of Windows 8. The benchmark settings were the same as for the previous run time experiments. TABLE I. TOP 20 WILDCARDED PATTERNS OF Support Count 1. 2. 3.

It can be concluded that, from a mem point of view, WSDD and GapBIDE have while PrefixSpan uses slightly more memory significantly more memory.

The correlation between the input pa memory consumption can be clearly obs

hms F ONE SMART HOME 4. 5. b b a b a a * a b a a b b a b a a b * b a b

ption show that y WSDD, are ry consumption of few dozen MB to ber of events, the IDE+ on the other mory consumption e the best results, y and BIDE+ uses arameters and the served: the more events, the longer the patterns support, the higher the memory An additional insight into the increase of events and t support favor WSDD more th increase of memory cons proportionally higher for mor support than it is for WSDD.

A comparison of wildcarde patterns does not show signific shows, there are only few produces significantly different is deactivated. Furthermore th of the wildcarded patterns over mostly rather low. It can there not worth considering when m home event data since the incr consumption is not yielding si following we consider only non IV. DESIGN OF THE Because not all frequent energy savings, we defined som relevant behavior patterns.

To ensure that a relevant energy, it must be composed of (1) A relevant pattern mu lower energy usage (events). For a detailed

(2) The pattern must co serve as condition to time.

Because a relevant patte which represents the condition be interpreted using an associa an implication of the form X → Y, whe where X is a sequence of norm and I is the set of all possibl above states that when X o probability.

For this application no mo sensors where used. Only act light, TV etc. are considered.

### A. Architecture

We proceeded to build a rec WSDD algorithm we designed recommender system develope Fig. 3 and can be divided in thr • The storage of the asso • The event stream of th the smart home

• The matching algorith s and/or the less the minimum y consumption. memory consumption was that the lowering of the minimum an GapBIDE, meaning that the sumption for GapBIDE is re events and/or less minimum ed patterns with non-wildcarded cant improvement. As TABLE I. instances where wildcarding t results from when wildcarding e increase of the support count r the non-wildcarded patterns is efore be said that wildcarding is mining frequent patterns in smart rease in run times and memory gnificantly better results. In the n-wildcarded pattern.

RECOMMENDER SYSTEM or periodic patterns result in me characteristics to identify the pattern can be used to save f two main components: ust contain at least one action to (actions are a subset of normal d description, see nsist of normal events, which suggest the action at the right ern consists of normal events, n, and an action, this pattern can ation rule. An association rule is ere X, Y ⊂ I, mal events, Y is a single action, le events. The association rule occurs, Y occurs with certain otion detectors or other location tivities like turning on (or off) commender system using the. The architecture of the d in this project is shown in ree main parts: ociation rules he current behavior data inside Fig. 4. Example of a matching rule in the algorithm (FS

The rule database stores the associa were obtained from the mined relevant pa stream contains the real-time events from ordered by time of their occurrence.

The matching algorithm is the core recommender system. It matches the rule stream. The most common existing rule mat RETE by Forgy. We use a determi machine (FSM) approach as depicted in Fig the order of the events better than RETE. A the FSM is created for each new event in the no matching in the first attempt, the instance memory. If the condition did match and the the action itself, the machine sends a recomm

The design of the recommender system one rule to be matched at the same time. multiple conflicting recommendations, we p the rules and use the weights as a prioritizatio

### B. Implementation

The recommender system was implem based Microsoft® Azure VM (Virtual Mach set up with Ubuntu 14.04.

The smart homes event data is parsed fro the digitalSTROM system. The files are up installed on the digitalSTROM infrastructure made accessible for this project on a file se

SM) ation rules, which atterns. The event m the smart home, component of the es and the event ching algorithm is inistic finite state g. 4, which reflects A new instance of e stream. If there is e is removed from e next event is not mendation. allows more than In order to avoid propose to weight on criterion. mented on a cloud ine). The VM was om the log files of loaded by a script e in the houses and rver. The files are copied every 5 minutes by rem recommender system is runnin script and stored in a MySQL d The evaluation was cond inhabitants producing real even equipped with the smart digitalSTROM. The historical mined by the recommender sy the number of relevant patterns ranked and the owners of the where requested to take part in houses agreed to participate i including both single-a Recommendations were sent pe the inhabitants. An example of in Fig. 5.

We ran the evaluation in tw the following sections.

After running the evaluation for phase 1 for 2 weeks, the inhabitants were interviewed and their feedback was used to improve the recommender for the second phase. We also did a regression analysis of the results using the weighted feedback as the dependent variable and the following prioritization served as explanatory variables:

• The length of the pattern • The position of the action • Support of the pattern • Confidence of the rule The result of the regression analysis shows that patterns with high confidence and high pattern-length tend to receive better feedback than the other patterns. On the other hand, support and position of the action did not show any significance to describe the feedback a rule. It is worth to notice that support was the major attribute for mining frequent patterns. Fig. 6 shows the regression based on confidence.

### B. Phase 2

The aim of the second phase of the evaluation was to increase the ratio of answered recommendations and the ratio of useful recommendations compared to the first phase. The analysis of the data collected during phase 1 was used to adapt the system, which should lower negative rated and unanswered recommendations. The prototype was improved in the following points:

• All rules with 10 negative feedbacks in a row during phase 1 were removed from phase two

• To mitigate the problem of the low response rate caused by ambiguous recommendations, we enriched the text with the name of the room where the device is located

• As result of the regression analysis, confidence and pattern-length of each rule where multiplied with their estimate to calculate a coefficient which gives indication about the usefulness of a rule. A threshold is defined and 19 rules out of 54 were excluded from the second phase (35 rules remained)

The results from phase 2 are summarized in TABLE II. The results show a similar ratio of useful recommendations as in phase 1, as well as a similar response rate (45.8%).

However, a significant improvement can be observed in the number of recommendations sent: 0.44 recommendations/day/home in phase 2 versus 1.43 recommendations/day/home in phase 1. Note that, for the same ratio of useful recommendations, a lower number of recommendations per day per home means less noise for the user and a better comfort level.

We consider the 10% ratio of useful recommendations a promising good start for a first version of the system which has not been optimized nor has it seen a large amount of usage data.

### VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

The proposed algorithm, called WSSD, outperforms existing algorithms both in run-time as well as in memory usage. Even though WSDD allows the mining of wildcarded patterns, their use does not show any significant improvement over non-wildcarded patterns for smart home events, with the drawback of increased memory usage and runtime.

Based on this algorithm, we proposed a recommender system that generates recommendations for the smart home inhabitants with the aim of reducing power consumption without decreasing their comfort. The results show that such a system works in real life and achieved a ratio of useful recommendations of about 10%, while sending 0.44 recommendations/day/home.

Several points of improvement were identified during the evaluation phases of this work. A follow-up research project is already ongoing and will build upon the findings of this work. The following ideas for further research materialized during the design, implementation or evaluation of the recommender system:

• Using confidence and pattern length instead of support or periodicity as criteria for the mining algorithm, resulting in more and better patterns

• The time between two events (or the action) is considered neither by the mining algorithm nor by the recommender system. Using this information will improve the accuracy of the suggestions made by the system

• Other attributes could be introduced to decide if a rule is relevant or not. Such attributes might be: Time of day when the pattern occurs most

Weekday when the pattern occurs most Season when the pattern occurs most

• The recommender should learn from the feedback of the inhabitants in order to prioritize the rules, instead of just excluding a rule after 10 negative feedbacks in a row

• Look into estimating the amount of energy that would be saved by the recommendations

• Test other machine learning algorithms and frameworks such as "Torch and Caffe"
