# How Green is 'Green' Energy? — Supplementary Content

### Box 1. Hydropower Expansion Threatens the Amazon and the Andean Foothills

Hydroelectric dams on major river tributaries in the Amazon basin and adjoining Andean foothillswhich drain into the Amazon Riverare exploding in number (Figure I). Currently there are 48 dams of >2 MW capacity in the Andean foothills, with another 151 dams planned over the next 20 years, which will disrupt ecological connectivity of five of the six major Andean tributaries of the Amazon. Currently, 191 dams exist in the Amazon basin itself, and another 246 are planned or are under construction. The largest nation in the Amazon, Brazilwhich comprises 8.6% of the global hydropower capacity, second only to China (27.9%) derives >70% of its electricity generation from hydropower.

The potential for new dams to promote deforestation, not only by flooding forest but also by promoting road and power line networks that greatly increase human access to forests, is often underappreciated. Of the planned and existing Andean dams, 36% would require new roads and 79% new transmission lines. Deforestation and forest degradation has affected thousands of square kilometers of forest surrounding the Tucuruí Dam in Brazil, largely from a 10-fold increase in the human population and in associated logging and forest clearing. Twelve large dams planned for the Tapajós River and its tributaries in the eastern Amazon are projected to increase deforestation by nearly 1 million ha by 2030, largely as a result of increased road and power line construction.

Although the massive Balbina Hydroelectric Reservoir in the Brazilian Amazon increased the available habitat and doubled the population size of the giant otter (Pteronura brasiliensis), this same reservoir flooded more than 3000 km 2 of undisturbed rainforest, and 98% of the 3546 islands in the reservoir lost at least 25% of the vertebrate species originally occupying the landscape. Similar consequences can be expected from the hundreds of dams that are planned or under construction in the Amazon. along the exposed margins of tropical reservoirs. These regenerating plants are then flooded and killed during the wet season, producing additional carbon emissions each year. For example, the 40 MW Curuá-Una Dam in Pará, Brazil, which spans 72 km 2 in surface area, releases 3.6-fold the amount of greenhouse gases annually than would be produced by generating the same energy from fossil fuels. In the vast tropical regions such as the Amazon (Box 1) and Congo basins, very large reservoirs are necessary to generate adequate power because of the flat topography; the high ratio of reservoir surface area to power generation only increases these emissions.

Globally, hydroelectric reservoirs emit substantial amounts of CO 2 and CH 4 into the atmosphere, ranging from 48-82 Tg of CO 2 and 3-14 Tg of CH 4 per year from their reservoir surfaces. Further emissions are frequently caused by habitat loss and fragmentation associated with networks of roads and power lines needed for dam construction and operation (Box 1).

### Box 2. Wind and Solar Energy Imperil Biodiversity in California

California is a pioneer in renewable energy and has set strict targets to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions. In January 2017 the California Air Resources Board approved a plan to reduce its emissions by 2030 to levels 40% lower than those in 1990, the most ambitious target in North America. This plan involves obtaining one third of its energy from renewables by 2020, and half by 2030. California has invested heavily in wind and solar energy, and is currently the largest producer of solar energy and the fourth-largest producer of wind energy in the USA.

The rapid expansion of wind and solar energy imperils some species in California. The 5400 wind turbines at Altamont Pass Wind Resource Area (Figure I) are estimated to kill some 2700 birds per year, including over 1100 raptors, of which 67 are golden eagles (Aquila chrysaetos). Among the golden eagles killed, at least 25% were recent immigrants (from >100 km away), suggesting this single facility has continental-scale impacts. The Altamont Pass turbines also affect California ground squirrels (Spermophilus beecheyi); individuals living under the turbines had elevated vigilance rates owing to the high background noise. If displaced by noise from this wind farm, their loss could affect predators such as golden eagles and other species that use their burrows for shelter (e.g., burrowing owls, red-legged frogs, California tiger salamanders). The endangered Mojave ground squirrel (Xerospermophilus mohavensis) is expected to lose up to one tenth of its habitat from expansion of wind and solar energy facilities in the Mojave Desert, which has four of the five largest solar thermal-power stations worldwide. The largest of these (Figure II) was built in prime habitat for the Mojave desert tortoise (Gopherus agassizii) (Figure III). To mitigate its impact, at least 55 tortoises were translocated short distances (<500 m) outside the facility. Compared to control populations, translocated tortoises had somewhat differing activity patterns in the first year after translocation, but there were no differences in body condition, growth, or mortality in subsequent years. This same power plant caused an estimated 3500 bird deaths per year, most due to collisions. Wind farms can also impact resident and migrating bird populations. Three wind farms in North and South Dakota caused the displacement of seven breeding grassland bird species, effects that extended beyond the first year after construction. In Finland, breeding success of white-tailed eagles (Haliaeetus albicilla) was lower in territories located closer to wind turbines. By contrast, nests of scissor-tailed flycatchers (Tyrannus forficatus) had higher survival rates close to turbines at a Texas wind farm, possibly due to reduced activity by raptors, a key nest predator, around the wind turbines.

Wind farms affect both local and distant populations. Stable hydrogen isotope analysis showed that 28% of the noctule bats (Nyctalus noctula) killed by wind turbines in eastern Germany were migratory, originating from distant parts of northern and northeast Europe including the Baltic states, Belarus, or Russia. In the Appalachian Mountains, two bat species sustained the highest levels of mortality at a wind farm; for the eastern red bat (Lasiurus borealis) 57% of mortalities were of non-local individuals, whereas for the hoary bat (L. cinereus) 99% of killed individuals were local, suggesting that ongoing mortality could imperil this species.

Offshore wind farms can also affect bird populations and migration patterns. The Belwind Wind Farm at Bligh Bank, 46 km off the coast of Belgium, caused an 85% decline in northern gannets (Morus bassanus), a 71% decline in common guillemots (Uria aalge), and a 64% decline in razorbills (Alca torda). Conversely, there was a 430% increase in lesser black-backed gulls (Larus fuscus) and a 850% increase in herring gulls (Larus argentatus) at the same wind farm site, possibly because of increased roosting or feeding opportunities. Pink-footed geese (Anser brachyrhynchus) migrating between Greenland or Iceland and the UK altered their migration route to avoid newly constructed wind farms off the eastern coast of England. Common eider (Somateria mollissima) and geese altered their migration routes to avoid a wind farm in the Baltic Sea off the coast of Denmark; the proportion of flocks migrating through the wind farm declined sharply from 40.4% before construction to only 8.9% after construction. Altered migration patterns can also occur in response to onshore wind farms, as observed for migrating raptors at wind farms in the Isthmus of Tehuantepec in Mexico. Shifting migration patterns could result in increased energy expenditure by migrating birds and associated declines in survival.

Noise from wind farms can also affect wildlife (Box 2). On wind farms European robins (Erithacus rubecula) decreased their territorial response to intruders because of turbine noise, and this could potentially reduce their ability to deter rivals and thereby reduce their breeding success. Amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals had reduced species richness at wind farms in Portugal, possibly also because of cascading effects caused by wind turbines.

Wind farms can also increase local temperatures. Active wind farms in Scotland raised air temperature by 0.18 C and absolute humidity by 0.03 g m À3 during the night, and also increased variability in air, surface, and soil temperature. Based on satellite data, four large wind farms in Texas were found to increase local temperature by up to 0.72 C per decade relative to nearby control sites. The implications of this temperature increase are unknown but might have additional consequences for biodiversity.
